Time to end class squeamishness: first government unit to improve life chances for working class
A new class unit will drive forward government work to improve life chances
Social Mobility Commission to be closed down as part of wider government review into arm’s length bodies
New unit to focus on improving lives of low-income families, disadvantaged communities and rooting out child poverty
Working-class people will be at the heart of a renewed government drive to tackle entrenched inequality, with Minister for Women and Equalities Bridget Phillipson establishing the government’s first dedicated Class Unit.
The new unit will bring social mobility work into the heart of government, with the Social Mobility Commission (SMC) closing as part of the government’s wider review of arm’s length bodies to ensure work is delivered as effectively as possible.
It will sit within the Office for Equality and Opportunity alongside units on race, women, LGBT+ and disability, reflecting the role of class in how people are treated and the opportunities they have in life.
This will also include a focus on working class people’s experiences of public services, health disparities and access to employment.
One of the unit’s early priorities will be the introduction of the socio-economic duty – a new power in the Equality Act that will legally require public bodies to consider how to improve the lives of lower-income families as part of decisions around issues like transport, services and budgets.
The closure of SMC follows a comprehensive review of operations and is part of the government’s drive to shift energy and resources into delivering change for people more quickly.
From lifting the two-child limit, to expanding free school meals for children on universal credit, to introducing the biggest uplift to workers’ rights in a generation, this government has already gone further than any before to reduce inequality and cut child poverty.
Minister for Women and Equalities, Bridget Phillipson said:
I’m proud that more children than ever before will be lifted out of poverty in this Parliament, but we know there is so much more to do to truly break the link between people’s background, and the lives they lead.
We have been squeamish about class for too long. From exam results to life expectancy, we must bear down on the entrenched inequalities that exist in our country.
These are inter-generational challenges and our new Class Unit will put them right at the heart of government, as we harness power that for too long has been held in Westminster, and return it to the places people live, work and invest.
SMC’s closure reflects this government’s view that fixing national inequalities is a core responsibility of the state, with ministers rightly accountable for driving progress and delivering real change to people’s lives.
The reforms build on the government’s record to date in reducing child poverty and improving opportunity. Key steps already taken include:
scrapping the two-child limit
increasing the National Living Wage
the biggest uplift to workers’ rights in a generation, through the Employment Rights Act
revitalising local family services through Best Start centres
investing billions to rebuild communities through Pride in Place
The government will continue its drive to shift power, funding and decision-making closer to people, giving every part of the country the tools to create strong local economies, improve public services and shape its own future.